---
layout: post
title: The meaning of Push-forward and Pull-back
date: 2025-02-28 11:12:00-0400
description: math
tags: category-theory
categories: math
related_posts: false
selected: true
---
\usepackage{tikz-cd}

The words push-forward and pull-back get thrown around a lot in category theory. In my opinion, they describe a nice idea that occurs often in mathematics.

The concept applies to a familiar and very general situation in mathematics.

Given two objects \(X\), \(Y\) in a category and a morphism between them (say, two vector spaces),

% https://tikzcd.yichuanshen.de/#N4Igdg9gJgpgziAXAbVABwnAlgFyxMJZABgBpiBdUkANwEMAbAVxiRAA0QBfU9TXfIRQAmclVqMWbAJrdxMKAHN4RUADMAThAC2SMiBwQkARmr1mrRCDVyuQA
\begin{tikzcd}
X \arrow[rr, "f"] &  & Y
\end{tikzcd}

now say we have a property/construction on \(X\). This can be anything: the Jacobian at a point (for a smooth manifold \(X\)), or the set of singular simplices. Given this data we can define the push-forward by post-composing via the morphism \(f\). This yields, for example, the push-forward measure, the push-forward differential, or a singular simplex in \(Y\). So we push-forward the property to \(Y\).

Sometimes nomenclature obscures this principle a bit.

Let us consider the push-forward measure.

We first need to pass to the inverse image map, via the contravariant power set functor; then, applying the measure via post-composition is indeed just the push-forward idea.

Now for the pull-back, we have a similar idea.

For example, given a map out of \(Y\), say \(y^* : Y \to \mathbb{R}\) (if \(Y\) is a vector space and \(\mathbb{R}\) denotes the real numbers), we can define the pull-back by pre-composition with \(f\).

% https://tikzcd.yichuanshen.de/#N4Igdg9gJgpgziAXAbVABwnAlgFyxMJZABgBpiBdUkANwEMAbAVxiRAA0QBfU9TXfIRQAmclVqMWbAJrdeIDNjwEio4ePrNWiEAB1dAWzo4AFgCMzwAEpdu4mFADm8IqABmAJwgGkZEDggkAEZqTSkdNzl3Lx9EEP9AxFEJLTYATwAqKJBPb19qAKRksO0QAA8s6gYsMFKoOjgTBzsuIA
\begin{tikzcd}
X \arrow[rr, "f"] \arrow[rrdd, "x^*", dashed] &  & Y \arrow[dd, "y^*"] \\
                                             &  &                    \\
                                             &  & \mathbb{R}        
\end{tikzcd}

This defines a new map \(x^*: X \to \mathbb{R}\), with \(x^* = y^* \circ f\).
